---
title: "He cho súq hí?"
title_en: "What do you like?"
chapter: 9
slug: "9"
subject: "wh-questions and generics"
---

In this lesson, we'll learn how to ask questions using _hí_{:.t}, and the difference between "episodic" and "generic" sentences.

## Conversation

Lucas and Míqte find the pizzeria, but...

> **Lucas:** _Tı ké pıcarıaq hí raı?_{:.t}<br>
> **Míqte:** _Ní tıeq! Kéo, oaı, naı dom ké rıaq._{:.t.sec}<br>
> **Lucas:** _Ubaı…_{:.t}<br>
> **Míqte:** _Nho. He baı nhána báq pıca noqgı._{:.t.sec}<br>
> **Lucas:** _Kéo naı baı nhána sía raı._{:.t}<br>
> **Míqte:** _Ubaı._{:.t.sec}<br>
> …<br>
> **Lucas:** _Tao úmo hí raı móq?_{:.t}<br>
> **Míqte:** _Eju… enı! He cho jí máo ní sushırıaq._{:.t.sec}<br>
> **Lucas:** _Fa úmo nánı rıaq ba!_{:.t}<br>

## Vocabulary

| Word | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| _he_{:.t} | as a rule… |
| _báq **verb**{:.v}_{:.t} | **verb**{:.v}-s in general |
| _hí **verb**{:.v}_{:.t} | which **verb**{:.v}? |
| _nánı **verb**{:.v}_{:.t} | that **verb**{:.v} over there |
| _kéo_{:.t} | but |
| _ubaı_{:.t} | alas / too bad |
| _eju_{:.t} | let's see… / let me think… |
| _enı_{:.t} | look, here |
| _dom_{:.t} | ▯ is closed/inactive |
| _akımı_{:.t} | ▯ is open/active |
| _tao_{:.t} | ▯ does ▯ |

## Asking "what" with _hí_{:.t}

The word _hí_{:.t} is a question word (like _ma_{:.t}) with the same grammar as an article: it means "which." It's also how you say "who" (which person?) and "what" (which thing?) and "where" (at which place?), and so on.

> _Jıa baı **hí** poq ké pıca?_{:.t}<br>
> Which person will make the pizza?
>
> _Sıgı **hí** kıq móq?_{:.t}<br>
> Which movie(s) is/are interesting?

<details class="aside semantics" markdown="1">
<summary>Inquisitive semantics (advanced!)</summary>

Compared to _sá_{:.t} and _tú_{:.t}, it's hard to describe how _hí_{:.t} "works", because Toaq buys into a somewhat advanced theory of question semantics known as [inquisitive semantics](https://projects.illc.uva.nl/inquisitivesemantics/). Here is a very rough overview.

Imagine a lock with a two-digit code, where each digit is either 0 or 1. We can consider the four _possible worlds_ that correspond to the various codes that might open the lock, and name these worlds 00, 01, 10, and 11.

An **information state** is a set of possible worlds: {00, 01} is the information state corresponding to "the first digit is 0". Getting more information about the real world means _narrowing down_ this set of possible worlds.

An **issue** is a non-empty set of information states under consideration, each of which would "resolve the issue". For example, the question "what is the first digit?" raises the issue:

> {"the first digit is 0", "the first digit is 1"}<br>
> = \{\{00, 01\}, \{10, 11\}\}

and a question like "Is the code 10, or is it 11?" raises this issue:

> {"the code is 10", "the code is 11"}<br>
> = \{\{10\}, \{11\}\}

which is still a question, but also dismisses the possibility that the code is 00 or 01. Meanwhile, a declarative sentence like "the code is 11" raises the issue:

> {"the code is 11"}<br>
> = \{\{11\}\}

which no longer contains alternatives that are "being questioned" and purely narrows down the set of possible worlds.

Propositions are identified by the issues that they raise. When we utter a proposition _P_, we both suggest that the real world is in ∪_P_, and ask for further information that would _resolve_ the issue raised by _P_.

Thus, you can imagine _Nuo hí poq?_{:.t} ("Which person sleeps?") as denoting something like:

> {"_Nuo_{:.t} _p_" | _poq_{:.t}(_p_)}<br>
> = {"_Nuo jí_{:.t}", "_Nuo súq_{:.t}", …}<br>
> = \{\{w<sub>j</sub>, w<sub>j'</sub>, …\}, \{w<sub>s</sub>, w<sub>s'</sub>, …\}, …\}

The union of these subsets covers all the worlds where _some_ person sleeps, but they are partitioned in a way that raises the issue of precisely _which_ person sleeps.

For all the gory details, see the [Inquisitive Semantics book](https://fdslive.oup.com/www.oup.com/academic/pdf/openaccess/9780198814788.pdf) and [_Some questions in typed inquisitive semantics_](https://champollion.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/2015-inquisitive-handout.pdf) (specifically the denotation of _which_).

</details>

## Episodic and generic sentences

_He_{:.t} is a tense-like word, used to make statements that are true "as a rule" or "in general", about no specific time in particular.

> _Jaı jí._{:.t}<br>
> I am/was happy (at some definite time).
>
> _**He** jaı jí._{:.t}<br>
> I am happy (as a rule).

The first sentence claims the existence of a "me-happy event". In fact, this is what any sentence _without_ _he_{:.t} does, and we call such sentences **episodic**. (They tell us about some single "episode" that happens.)

The second sentence, with _he_{:.t}, instead makes a **generic** claim: one that is "normally" true about the world (though not necessarily always.)

<details class="aside semantics" markdown="1">
<summary>Individual-level verbs</summary>

There are some verbs that hold for the entirety of their subject's existence, and thereby escape this episodic vs. generic distinction. For example, it's hard to read _Poq jí_{:.t} as "there is some me-being-a-person event", because _poq_{:.t} never stops being true of its subject. But it's also strange to say _He poq jí_{:.t} — it's not like we are "normally/generally person-ing".

These verbs are called _individual-level_ verbs. We can imagine that _poq_{:.t} maps to some predicate that doesn't involve events whatsoever: there are no _poq_{:.t}-events, only people. Verbs for which events do make sense are called _stage-level_.

</details>

## Generic reference

Closely related is the article _báq **verb**{:.v}_{:.t}, which makes a "generic reference" to things which _verb_{:.v}, without picking any or all of them out. A simple way to think of this is that it's just like the indefinite plural in English.

> _**báq** gochıq_{:.t}<br>
> cats
>
> _**báq** choko_{:.t}<br>
> chocolate

In _episodic_ sentences, this works out to meaning the same thing as _sá_{:.t}:

> _Pu chuq jí **báq** choko._{:.t}<br>
> (There is some past event where) I ate chocolate.
>
> _Pu chuq jí **sá** choko._{:.t}<br>
> (There is some past event where) there was some chocolate that I ate.

But in combination with _he_{:.t}, we can make generic claims about generic nouns:

> _**He** kuo sá koruo._{:.t}<br>
> (As a rule,) some ravens are black.
>
> _**He** kuo **báq** koruo._{:.t}<br>
> (As a rule,) **ravens** are black.

In English, the simple present tense very often expresses generic claims, but we don't even think about it. You may be tempted to translate "I like movies" into _Cho jí báq kıq_{:.t}, but this Toaq sentence only claims an _episode_ of you doing some movie-liking at some point in time. It's more correct to say _He cho jí báq kıq_{:.t}, which is properly generic.

<details class="aside semantics" markdown="1">
<summary>How do generic claims work?</summary>

Generics are the subject of much debate in the world of semantics, even though people seem to have clear intuitions for them.

"Ticks carry Lyme disease" sounds true, even though only a small percentage of ticks ever carry the disease. Meanwhile, "people are right-handed" sounds intuitively wrong, even though most people really are right-handed. How can we make sense of these apparent contradictions?

Some linguists posit a "generic operator" that is cognitively primal — perhaps it can be identified with whatever cognitive function allows humans to stereotype and form biases.

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy offers an overview of this topic in its article on [_Generic Generalizations_](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/generics/), but it's not an easy read. Whatever lies at the heart of generics, _he_{:.t} and _báq_{:.t} are Toaq's way of tapping into it.

</details>
