---
title: "Mıu jí, ꝡá…"
title_en: "I think that…"
chapter: 11
slug: "11"
subject: "content clauses, ꝡa"
---

Let's look at how to create more complex Toaq sentences: ones that involve subclauses.

## Conversation

TODO

## Content clauses

A content clause is introduced by _ꝡá_{:.t}, which means "that". It turns the following clause into a noun phrase, so that it can act as the subject or object of another clause.

> _Jıa dana súq nháo._{:.t}<br>
> You will defeat him.
>
> _Chı jí, **ꝡá** jıa dana súq nháo._{:.t}<br>
> I believe **that** you will defeat him.

A verb can relate two content clauses. For example, the following sentence uses _laheq_{:.t} "▯ entails/implies ▯".

> _Laheq, **ꝡá** zudeq súq Tóaqzu, **ꝡá** Toaqpoq súq._{:.t}<br>
> The fact that you speak Toaq implies that you're a Toaqist.

In Toaq, we write commas around the start and end of a subclause.

<details class="aside grammar" markdown="1">
<summary>Terminators</summary>

If _ꝡá_{:.t} marks the beginning of a content clause, how do we mark the end? Doesn't that last example sentence need a terminator, like Lojban's _kei_?

A Toaq parser just looks at the arity of the verb to figure out where the clause ends. _Zudeq_{:.t} has two slots, so after _súq_{:.t} and _Tóaqzu_{:.t}, what follows can't be a third argument, and instead the clause must end here.

Trailing adverbs belong to a subclause, if possible. Consider this pair of sentences:

> _Ruaq jí, ꝡá noqgı ké haq râo fíachaq._{:.t}<br>
> I state **that the food was good yesterday.**

> _Ruaq râo fíachaq jí, ꝡá noqgı ké haq._{:.t}<br>
> I stated yesterday **that the food is good.**

</details>

## The word _ꝡa_{:.t}

The word _ꝡa_{:.t}, in the falling tone, marks the start of a _main_ clause, and thus the start of a sentence.

Saying _ꝡa_{:.t} doesn't change the meaning of a sentence, but you can say it while thinking of what to say next, or just to clearly mark that you're starting a new sentence.

> _**Ꝡa…** jıa faq hí raı?_{:.t}<br>
> So… what's going to happen?
>
> _**Ꝡa** fa áma ké saodoaq dâ._{:.t}<br>
> We're going to the city.
